---
title: Phenomenon
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
---

This afternoon I watched _Phenomenon_ on the TV. It moved me, and I'm grateful
for that.

John Travolta plays an ordinary man in a small town. He's a mechanic, a kind
single man, friends with everybody. On the night of his thirty-seventh birthday
party something happens to him. He experiences it as a bright light coming down
from the sky. He falls unconscious in the street.

After this experience he starts to change. He becomes highly intelligent, all of
a sudden easily beating his friend and mentor the local doctor, who also happens
to be the only educated person around. He stops sleeping, starts reading three
or four books every day, comes up with all sorts of ideas and inventions from a
new fertiliser for crops to a better solar energy system, from a car powered by
food scraps and pig shit to a better layout of the parking spaces at the local
bar.

He develops strange powers, including telekinesis and the ability to predict
earthquakes by feeling the ultra low frequency vibrations in the earth. He saves
a sick, lost local boy by first learning to speak and understand Portuguese from
a book in twenty minutes so he can ask the boy's father where he is, and then
feeling his location by concentrating really hard and feeling the hidden boy's
pain.

After this, things go wrong. The town folk---formerly his friends---start to
think that he can predict the future, "He knows more than he's telling us".
They've heard his story and think he's been changed by aliens, that his
experience was an alien abduction and the light was a flying saucer. They all
become afraid of him when in a moment of anger he breaks the mirror behind the
bar from across the room, and he feels rejected and isolated. He gets in trouble
with the FBI and military intelligence because he cracks top-secret encrypted
radio signals and replies to them for a joke.

And then he collapses again and ends up in hospital where they do a brain scan
and discover a large and fatal brain tumour that has been somehow enhancing his
brain activity. The doctors are happy: this explains all his symptoms, including
the bright light. (They conveniently forget about the telekinesis at this
point.) Since he's going to die soon anyway, one of the doctors wants to operate
on him while he's still alive, and pressures him to agree, for the sake of
science. Although the operation will almost surely kill him, they will learn a
whole lot more about the brain than if they wait until after he's dead. He
refuses, and they have him declared mentally incompetent---a sick joke since he
has superhuman knowledge, intelligence and powers of concentration, and has
developed a clarity and compassion that is quite saintly by this point---and try
to force him to do the operation anyway. He escapes from the hospital and
returns to the love interest. (Sorry, there was a love story happening along the
way too.) He dies in her arms the next night, after spending a beautiful last
day together with her and her two children.

The film finishes a year later, with all the people coming together to celebrate
his next birthday. Everyone seems happier, all sorts of problems have been
solved, with the help of his ideas.

I'm not ashamed to say that I cried and cried. I'd seen it before, but hadn't
remembered very much. The story has a little in common with _Flowers for
Algernon_. I like the ambiguity of it: while the doctors have their neat, tidy
explanation, who's to say that the brain tumour wasn't the consequence of some
alien or supernatural intervention, rather than the cause?

The story accurately shows the way people are suspicious of, and turn against
anyone who is different, even when he's someone they've known, loved and trusted
for years. They're so quick to tear him down. Only a very few stick by him when
the going gets tough. Most reject him and become hostile.

It also accurately portrays the arrogance and lack of humanity in the medical
profession---with the notable exception of the local doctor, played by Robert
Duvall. A total lack of humanity, compassion or spirituality: they want to play
god themselves.

And I love that after struggling hard with what's happened to him, not knowing
what to do with his gifts, what he arrives at, the clarity he reaches, is that
it's people and kindness that really matters. Every idea he had, every
suggestion was just trying to help people. From the start, he was a kind, good
person without a greedy or harmful bone in his body or thought in his head. At
one point in the middle of the film he cries out in anguish that "they" have
done this to the wrong person, that they should have picked someone with an
education and status who could do something with these gifts. But he was wrong.
He was the perfect person for that gift, because it never even occurred to him
to use it against others or to benefit himself.

Films like this, and _Michael_, another John Travolta film, that have an
inspiring message to them, are often dismissed by critics and "clever" people.
It's so much safer to sneer at simple emotion and spirituality, at kindness and
compassion, than to open up to them. _Phenomenon_ was directed by Jon
Turtletaub, who also directed _The Kid_, another of my favourite films, and
another one with a serious and uplifting message that gets dismissed as
"simplistic" or "cornball" by people who are too sophisticated for their own
good. I've had it with that sort of arrogance, spent too much of my life around
people like that.

I'm grateful for my capacity to feel emotion and to enjoy and be open to the
experience of watching films like this. I used to think there was something
wrong with me because my friends would sneer at this sort of thing while I was
surreptitiously wiping away tears, but now I think there's something wrong with
them, and I'm not friends with that sort of people any more.

