---
title: The sound of running water
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
---

I am grateful for the sound of running water.

Our house is near the River Nairn. It's a modern, reasonably well-insulated
cottage, so when all the windows and doors are closed you can't hear much. But
if you open a window you can hear it. And every morning and evening coming and
going, I can hear the river running, fifty yards away at the bottom of the hill.

It's a joyful, soothing noise. It just goes on happily, day after day. Water
running over stones. Slowly, slowly wearing those stones down, bumping them
imperceptibly against each other, gently knocking the corners off, making them
rounder and rounder.

It must be about fifteen years ago that I went to a talk by Ben Andrews at the
mathematics department in ANU. It was about the Gaussian curvature flow, where
the points on a closed (convex) surface in space move with speed proportional to
their Gaussian curvature. Ben proved a 1974 conjecture by Firey, that the
surfaces become spherical as they shrink. A beautiful result.

Gauss curvature flow seems like it should be a pretty good mathematical model
for what happens to stones in a river. Gauss curvature is high at corners and
along edges, and lower on flatter parts. You'd expect the corners and edges to
get bumped more as the stones tumble together. But I wonder if anyone has done
an empirical study: are smaller pebbles really rounder than large ones? Not
necessarily in my experience, but I suspect that's because pebbles aren't made
of an isotropic material. Most of them come from sedimentary rock that has
layers to it and must be harder in one direction than in others. That's how you
get those nice flattened pebbles that are so good for skipping across the
surface of smooth water...

But I digress. All I really wanted to say was that I love the sound of the
river, and I particularly noticed it this morning as I left for work.
