---
title: Midnight silence
layout: post
categories: Gratitude

---

I am grateful for the silence and calm of the middle of the
night.

As a strong introvert, I find it exhausting spending all day
with other people. Don't get me wrong. Teaching is wonderful and
rewarding, and---with some exceptions---I enjoy and value the
time I spend with my students. But at the end of a day's
classes, I'm tired in a way that has little to do with the
physical or even mental effort I've expended.

I share a workroom with nine other computing and interactive
media lecturers. Again, I love them to bits. We get on extremely
well, and I value their friendship, support, companionship,
humour… And yet after a whole day in a small room with nine
others, I'm exhausted.

I try to take time out, to head out of the college in the middle
of the day for a few minutes. Often I walk into the centre of
town and have a cup of coffee by myself, although even then, I'm
surrounded by people.

When I get home, I'm in the house with A, and as much as I love
her and value her company and actively want to be with her,
well... after a long day with people, in the end she is still
another person.

So, often, at the end of the day, I find that I'm suffering from
"introvert overload", too tired to go to sleep, needing time
alone. And that's where the midnight silence comes in. It's so
quiet here. Once A and the cats have gone to sleep, it's
completely silent. No cars, no TV, no neighbours talking, no
parties… If I open the window I can hear the river. Sometimes I
can hear the wind. Occasionally an owl calls out. It's bliss.
And I can sit here and read and write and think and slowly get
myself back to normal.

If I'm working, this is often the only time of day when I can
get into "the zone" and stay there, uninterrupted, for hours.
Some of my work needs that.

The only problem is that by the time I've wound down enough to
go to sleep, it's often well after midnight. Right now, as I
write this, it's 2:17 AM. And so I start the next day tired.

I think I need to move to a planet where the days are about
thirty hours instead of twenty-four. But no, that wouldn't work,
because then everyone else would have that extra time. No, what
I need is a way to stop time for a few hours, freeze everybody
else so that I'd have silent time on my own to think, work,
sleep, whatever. And then when I was ready---not just ready but
eager for interaction with other people---I'd start them all
back up again.
