---
title: Lots
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
photo_url: /images/2014-03-23-10-03-12-Snow.jpg
---

Lots to be grateful for today: snow in the morning and a visit from the
squirrel, planting three more fruit trees in warm sunshine in the middle of the
day, and fertilising and mulching a few more, and then going to the film of
Peter Gabriel's _Back to Front_ concert in the afternoon.

![Snow]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2014-03-23-10-03-12-Snow.jpg)

Most of that needs no more explanation, but the film does: when Avigail told me
about it I bought a ticket online straight away, thinking it would sell out for
sure. But no. There were only four people there. All of us in our fifties. Three
grey-haired, slightly overweight middle-aged men---a bit like Peter Gabriel
himself---and one came with his partner.

I came to Peter Gabriel late, when I picked up a second-hand copy of _Us_ at a
stall on market day in Union Court at ANU in about 1993. I have no idea why I
picked it up. I'd barely heard of him then. Someone I knew five years earlier
was mad about Genesis, but I didn't even know that Gabriel had been in it. Just
one of those random things. The CD put itself in my hand and I bought it. I
haven't stopped listening since.

The concert was great. The film did it justice, and more. The band was the
same---at least the bass, guitar, drums & keyboards---as right back to the 80's.
On some songs the film cut between different live performances of the same song
from different concert tours right back to when they were all in their twenties.
Incredible.

I cried most of the way through. Who could keep a dry eye during _Solsbury Hill_
or _Don't Give Up_ or _Secret World_? Or when they finished with _Biko_, and at
the end he said to the audience, "What happens next is up to you", turned the
microphone around to face them and walked off while thousands of them kept on
singing, and then slowly the band members all walked off too until it was just
the drummer and the audience and they kept on and on.

I can't believe I haven't written about Peter Gabriel yet here. Another one of
my heroes. A humanitarian, an innovator, a champion of world music, human
rights, interspecies communication... One of the founders and funders of The
Elders. A man who has clearly been through an incredible personal journey. And
now in his sixties still doing his thing.

And only four of us were there for this special one-off screening. Everybody
else was watching _Need for Speed_ or _The Lego Movie_. Seriously.
