---
title: The Big Bang Theory
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
---

That's the television series, not the theory that the universe was created by a
massive exploding singularity...

Another day spent at home, sick. Yesterday's trip to Aberdeen for the SICSA
DemoFest North may have been important, may have been unavoidable, was even fun,
particularly seeing the snow-covered landscape in the hills around Huntly and
Insch. But a fifteen-hour day really wasn't what the doctor ordered. I woke
feeling exhausted and sicker than I'd been at any point so far with this cold.

And so I lay on the sofa, keeping warm, drinking lots of hot drinks, and
watching repeats of _The Big Bang Theory_.

I don't know why other people like the show. Maybe it's another excuse to laugh
at nerds? I wonder. How many people watching actually get all the science jokes?
How many of them identify with the characters, and how many look in from the
outside at the pathetic antics of a group of freaks?

Because my experience of watching this "comedy" is strongly coloured by the fact
that I used to live in it, in real life. With variations of course, transposing
the setting from California to Canberra, and at a slightly earlier stage in
life: they are postdocs but we were undergraduates. And none of us were into
comic books. I had friends who were quite a lot like Sheldon, and others who
were disturbingly like Howard. I was a bit like Leonard, except taller and with
fewer embarrassing allergies. (Those came later.) I was constantly struggling
with wanting to be normal, constantly falling hopelessly and tragically in love
with pretty girls who just wanted to be with cool sporty guys. I never really
embraced my inner geek, but nor could I abandon that side of myself and just be
"normal". I was a maths and science nerd, but ashamed of it, ashamed of not
being a confident, masculine footballer, drinker and rooter.

I am grateful for the way _The Big Bang Theory_ gives me an opportunity to
revisit that younger part of myself, and to look with compassion and gentle
humour at his anxious, tormented existence.
