---
title: Anti-lock brakes
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
---

I am grateful for the technological marvel of anti-lock brakes.

This morning, on the way to work, as I passed through the last little bit of the
woods near home, a deer suddenly appeared on the road. It was panicking, trying
to outrun the car and get across the road in front of me. I braked as hard as I
could, and steered away from the poor thing.  I still hit it, but only a gentle
bump. Enough to send it sprawling on the road, but it was scrambling to its feet
in no time. It gave me a funny look, confused, and then ran off into the trees.

I'd stalled the car, and of course my heart was pounding and my hands were
shaking, so I sat for a minute before driving off. I wound down the window and
looked after it, trying to see if it was OK. It stopped about forty yards away
and looked back at me. Maybe it's projection, but again I felt confusion coming
from it.

What was it thinking? My story is that it was surprised to still be alive, that
its mental picture of humans as vicious murderous creatures had been shaken,
that when it encountered the car it believed---in that split second of
panic---that its life was over.

I couldn't see terribly clearly, either when it was on its back on the road in
front of the car and scrambled up and ran off, or when it looked back at me, but
I couldn't see any injury. No blood. No limp. Just another creature that looked
as frightened and confused as me. And as relived that things didn't turn out worse.

Without anti-lock brakes, who knows what might have happened. The road was wet.
I turned at the same time as braking hard. I could easily have skidded, hit and
run over the deer, spun the car into the ditch or a tree...

---

Passing the same spot three days later I slowed and looked around, and there was
a deer in the same spot, looking down the hill at me. I'd like to think that it
was the same one, and even that it recognised me.

More and more I'm feeling a bond, an affinity, with the wildlife here. And the
farm animals for that matter. It's becoming clearer and clearer to me that we're
all the same, fundamentally, that our so-called "superior intelligence"---as
incredible as it is---is a relatively minor thing compared to everything that we
have in common with all the other creatures on this planet. Once I allow myself
to look at them with compassion, from a standpoint of fellowship rather than
superiority and difference, I can feel their emotions, empathise. In a limited
way, sure, but it's there. The same goes for our fellow humans, although
sometimes it's more difficult.
