---
title: Eucalyptus
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
---

I saw a eucalyptus tree today, in Elgin. Quite unexpected.

As I was walking back to the college at lunch time, I passed a house that for
some reason attracted me. There was just something inviting about it. I can't
put my finger on exactly what, but that doesn't matter.

I'm trying to pay attention to these feelings/thoughts/ideas/whatever they are,
when they come up. As part of trying to increase my awareness, trying to build
the neural pathways in my brain, nurture my inner child and adolescent... I
think it's important not to dismiss "crazy" ideas when they bubble up to the
surface of consciousness. Who knows what they might mean?

So I paid attention, slowed down and looked at the house, its garden, its
painted window frames, its brickwork, the slates on its roof. Nothing
particularly stood out, but it still looked inviting. I kept looking as I moved
on, and as I passed it, I got a glimpse down the driveway and into the back
garden, in the corner of which there stood a eucalyptus tree---a gumtree---from
Australia, about ten thousand miles away from where it belongs.

It looked like quite a well-established tree, maybe ten to twenty years old.
Doing alright. I wonder who planted it there, and why? Is that why I was
attracted to the house? Perhaps I noticed the tree unconsciously when I passed
there on another occasion, and remembered? It wasn't even a matter of having
passed it in the other direction a few minutes earlier, because I went by a
different road.

Maybe I needed to be reminded of something? Certainly seeing it brought back
memories of walking in the Australian bush: the Blue Mountains, the Australian
Alps, the Budawangs...

Or maybe there's something about that house, or someone in it, that might be
significant for me. Who knows? Maybe I'll end up living there one day.

I am grateful for these moments of awareness, where the world seems a little bit
richer and more layered than my usual surface view. And for the reminder of the
continent where I've spent most of my life.

