---
title: Deer and badgers
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
photo_url: /images/2014-03-09-18-01-01-Deer-tracks-1.jpg
---

I am grateful for the presence of wild animals all around us.

This afternoon on my walk I saw some clear deer tracks on the grassy bridge over
the River Nairn, down at the bottom of the Holme Rose estate. (You can see it
here on [Google maps](https://goo.gl/maps/jq6vL) if you're interested.)

At least, they looked clear to me:

![Deer tracks 1]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2014-03-09-18-01-01-Deer-tracks-1.jpg)

![Deer tracks 2]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2014-03-09-18-01-23-Deer-tracks-2.jpg)

That's got to be deer tracks, right?

---

Later, as it was getting darker, I saw badgers, twice. They often come to our
garden to eat birdseed from the ground under the feeder, but it's rare to see
them outside. They're so timid that they run off if we so much as touch the door
handle when they're in the garden, and I've hardly ever seen them when out
walking. I imagine they can hear me coming a mile off and just stay out of my
way.

But this evening I saw two! With the first one I only caught a glimpse of its
rear end as it disappeared down its hole. It must have been sitting there
quietly watching me as I walked towards it, but I didn't see it. When I got too
close it bolted. I waited quietly for about ten minutes to see if it would come
out again, but no luck.

The second one was half a mile further along. This time there was a fence and a
steep slope between us, so perhaps that made it was more confident. Again I saw
movement, but this one stopped in front of the entrance to its burrow (sett?)
and looked straight at me for several seconds before it decided to go
downstairs.

For animals that spend so much time in the dirt, I think badgers always look
incredibly clean. The white stripes on their heads are so bright they might have
just gone through the washing machine with a healthy dose of bleach. They almost
glow in the dark.

My first sight of badgers was nearly four years ago, at the height of summer
when the nights were very short and they would come out during daylight to get
an early start on their night's business. I was walking along the path near the
bridge at about ten o'clock, or even later, when I heard a load drumming sound
of running feet. I stopped and stood quietly, listening a watching, and a badger
came barrelling along the path, heading straight for me. They must not have very
good eyesight, because it kept going, full speed, galloping along until it was
about five yards away. I was just starting to wonder if I should take evasive
action, when it looked up, hesitated for a moment as if it really didn't expect
to see me there, and then smoothly changed course to head off into the woods to
the side of the track, still galloping along at high speed, crashing through the
undergrowth. After it had gone and all was quiet again, I started walking again,
amazed at my good luck, but I'd only gone a few more steps when exactly the same
thing happened again with a second badger.

Amazing creatures. I still wonder what they were up to, racing about like that.

Let's hope the barbarity of the badger cull doesn't make it anywhere near here.
