---
title: Doris Lessing
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
---

I am grateful for Doris Lessing's profoundly rich, interesting and moving
_Canopus in Argos: Archives_ series.

These five books look at human existence, politics, economics, history,
religion... from the perspective of alien races with technology and
understanding and development far beyond our own, who look at us with compassion
but can't do much about our suffering.

This is the third time I'm reading them. I've finished _Shikasta_ and _The
Marriages Between Zones Three, Four and Five_ and I'm just getting started on
_The Sirian Experiments_. (That's not a spelling mistake: "Sirian" refers to the
star Sirius, not the country Syria.) After that there are _The Making of the
Representative from Planet 8_ and _The Sentimental Agents in the Volyen Empire_.
(Just do yourself a favour and go out and get the whole set.)

Doris Lessing died last year aged ninety-four. She wrote many books, mostly
serious novels set in the present day exploring social issues. She became a
feminist icon for her probably best-known book _The Golden Notebook_. She hated
being labelled, but people constantly tried to pigeon-hole her: an African
writer, a communist, a feminist, a psychological writer. She won the Nobel Prize
at a ripe old age. Fine. But most of her fans, and all the literary critics who
praise her for the rest of her work, ignore the _Canopus in Argos_ books. I
think they find them embarrassing. How could a serious writer like Doris Lessing
waste her time on science fiction? Yet in an interview she said that of all her
books she was most proud of these and she was clearly put out by their
reception.

As I said, this is my third reading of them. The first time was many years ago
and I think I just whizzed through them as if they were adventure stories. The
second time, maybe ten years ago, I was blown away, wide-eyed with wonder,
feeling my world being turned upside-down. This time around I'm simply finding
them heartbreaking. The picture they paint is of poor diminished creatures
living out desperately shortened lives, completely unaware of their potential or
of the cosmic forces that affect them. That picture looks pretty right to me as
I watch us collectively hurtling towards and over the precipice, ruled by the
greediest and worst among us.

All the agents of Canopus can do on earth is to try to alleviate some of the
suffering, try to influence events in tiny ways so that a spark of life and
awareness continues, try to make sure that not too much of value is lost
forever, that good people find their way to places where they may be useful,
that people who need to survive the crisis do so in order to be able to plant
some of the seeds for what will come after. They feel as deeply as we do, but
they keep on working, calmly, pragmatically. They don't allow themselves to
become paralysed by anguish over things they can't change.

This reminds me of the well-known _Serenity Prayer_:

God, grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change,  
The courage to change the things I can,  
And the wisdom to know the difference.  

The agents of Canopus on earth have a global---indeed cosmic---perspective, but
they mostly stay away from high positions in major institutions, preferring
humble positions often outside "the system" where they can influence events
indirectly, where they can talk to many people, make suggestions, working behind
the scenes, out of the spotlight, where they can have a subtle effect on events
and the way they are perceived. They anticipate events and act, not to block
them, but so that their effects are a bit less harmful.

This last characteristic reminds me of the tiny bit I learned about Aikido...

In summary, they embody everything we would hope for from our "higher selves",
everything that the human growth movement and psychotherapy are aiming at. They
demonstrate perfect integration between their prefrontal cortex and their limbic
system, perfect harmony in their "inner family". They feel, but take care of it
and act only from a "captain" or "elder" perspective.

I think these books have had a profound effect on me and my outlook. I'm
grateful for that.
