---
title: Snowdrops
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
photo_url: /images/2014-02-08-16-52-09-Snowdrops.jpg
---

I am grateful for the first signs of new life starting to show.

I saw snowdrops by the side of our drystone wall on Friday morning as I was
heading off to work. I tried taking a picture out the window of the car, but it
didn't work out. I took this yesterday when I was out for a walk. It's not that
great either, but it's time I had a photo here again.

![Snowdrops]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2014-02-08-16-52-09-Snowdrops.jpg)

So this should probably be yesterday's "gratitude", or maybe even Fridays. This
is all getting a bit muddled. As it happens, I'm writing this a week later. I've
had a cold and had no energy for any of this. Haven't been feeling grateful for
much at all, to be honest.

I like winter, so seeing the first signs of spring brings up mixed feelings.
Once again we haven't had much of a winter. Lots of grey days. Lots of rain.
Lots of strong winds. But not much in the way of real cold or snow. I'm not sure
whether to be grateful for living in a spot that seems to have a force field
around it protecting it from all the bad weather, or to be a big envious of
people not that far away, who've had lots of snow.

---

Animal tracks
-------------

I'm also grateful today for my friend Dan for leading a fascinating afternoon of
wandering about looking for animal tracks and signs, and then showing us his
mini-museum of bits and pieces including amazing wings from roadkill owls and
hawks. I wasn't in the best form, with my nose running constantly and a
splitting headache, but I still enjoyed being out in the fresh air and seeing
the tiny signs left by animals. I didn't get down and sniff the poo, but that
was just because the way my nose was running I wouldn't have been able to smell
anything.
