---
title: Happy
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
photo_url: /images/2016-03-20-With-Celine-Laughing.jpg
---

![Ian and Céline at C's grandmother's 90th birthday celebrations]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-03-20-With-Celine-Laughing.jpg)

Last time I wrote here was over 18 months ago. A *lot* has happened
since then.

The week before, my friends in my men's group challenged me to do
something about my loneliness, more or less dared me to sign up on an
internet dating site. So I did, not expecting anything.

Later that same evening, after posting here, I saw a smiling face on
my screen, and under it "CC, Gif-sur-Yvette". Something about her
smile struck me, and by coincidence I also knew Gif-sur-Yvette, on the
southern outskirts of the Parisian *banlieu*, because I'd worked near
there in 1987 and 88 when I was a PhD student.

So I clicked and found the profile of Céline, a beautiful French
school teacher, much younger than me.  And then I saw that her profile
said "Appearance: Not attractive", and I thought that's not right. So
I send her a message, in bad French, not expecting anything of it,
saying that I knew I was too old and too far away but I just wanted
her to know that I thought she was very attractive, and by the way,
despite being an Australian living in Scotland I knew where Gif was
and had actually been there...

To my delight and amazement she wrote back, and after a little while
we started talking on Skype. And then I invited her to come and visit
Scotland, and she agreed and booked for a few days between Christmas
and New Year, and then things got more intense and so I went to visit
her in early December 2015, and then... lots more things happened.

Starting in January 2016 I took six months off work and travelled to
Morocco, Australia, Canada and Austria, with lots of visits to France
in between. Céline came and joined me in Australia for two weeks. I
also was fortunate enoguh to reconnect with my daughter after eight
long years of estrangement.

In August last year I returned to work in Scotland and very quickly
confirmed that it was the job, not me, that was the problem, and that
I had to leave as quickly as possible. I started applying for jobs in
Australia and in France, and around that time Céline and I decided to
get engaged.

I had no luck with the applications I sent for jobs in France, but was
successful with Quintessence Labs, a small but growing company working
in quantum cryptography, part of cyber security, so in January this
year I moved back to Canberra.

So here we are, living on opposite sides of the world, but plotting
how we're going to be able to live together soon. In the meantime
we're planning a small wedding here in Canberra and larger
celebrations in Gif and Elgin next time I'm in Europe.

Life is good. I feel extremely fortunate. Blessed even.
